Minimal config system (#1391)
C2SM/icon4py: docs/development/ADRs/0003_configuration_io.md

---
tags: [config, io, yaml]
---

# [Configuration IO]

- **Status**: valid
- **Authors**: Rico Häuselmann (@DropD)
- **Created**: 2026-07-29

> - **Updated**: 2026-07-29

Reviewer: do you need both of these since they're the same date?

Author: This is straight from the template. I think it helps to be reminded that one should change `updated` when the line is there. Anyway, by the time this gets merged they won't be the same anymore.

> While implementing and discussing the first iteration of ICON4Py's own configuration files, the following design choices were made.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While implementing and discussing the first iteration of ICON4Py's own configuration files, some design choices were made.
```
If you say `following`, I expect a list right after

## Context

> The configuration file is the primary way for a normal user to interact with ICON4Py, hence this iteration has been preceded by experiments and discussions. This ADR is a record of the results.

Reviewer: iteration?

Author: replaced with "the first implementation"

> The configuration file is the primary way for a normal user to interact with ICON4Py, hence this iteration has been preceded by experiments and discussions. This ADR is a record of the results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configuration file is the primary way for a user to interact with ICON4Py, hence this iteration has been preceded by experiments and discussions. This ADR is a record of the results.
```

> The following features / trade-offs were discussed and investigated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following features / trade-offs were discussed and investigated:
```

- compatibility with ICON

> - configuration file format choice

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- choice of configuration file format 
```
I like this phrasing better, but it's just a personal preference

- usability of the configuration file format
- potential lock-in into specific frameworks

> - round-tripping may or may not change a configuration file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- possibility of round-tripping changing a configuration file
```
To be in line with the phrasing of the other bullet points

## Decision

### ICON compatibility

> ICON4Py is currently able to read ICON configurations (namelists) on a best-effort basis (not all options supported). This may be replaced by a tool to convert namelists to ICON4Py configuration files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ICON4Py is currently able to read ICON configurations (namelists) on a best-effort basis (not all options supported). This may be replaced by a tool to convert namelists to ICON4Py configuration files.
```

ICON4Py configuration files need not be readable by ICON or any other application.

### Configuration file format

Desired: human readable well-defined format.

Current choice: YAML as default, other options supported by `cattrs`, the library we currently use.

Change if:

>  - a demonstrably better format is identified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change if a demonstrably better format is identified
```

### Usability - Duplicated Options

> At the time of writing this ADR, some component configuration classes contain attributes which should be configured only once for the whole experiment. They also provide default values for those options. This makes the configuration format obviously error prone.

Reviewer 2: add an example?

Author: Added `ndyn_substep` as well as `u0`, `eta_0` mentioned above

We decided to remove these duplicated options from the components, as they were historically necessary but serve only convenience now. This is a work in progress.

### Usability - Round Trips

Ideally, round-tripping configuration files should not change them.

Current state:

> - true for configuration files written by ICON4Py, not true in general

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- true for configuration files written by ICON4Py, false otherwise
```

Author: That is subtly wrong, because one can write a round-trippable config by hand. Maybe I will just drop that second clause, as the next bullet point makes it redundant.

- the `pyyaml` library, which powers our YAML support does not support the general case

Change if:

> - if this is considered worth the (small) effort, `pyyaml` could be replaced with `ruamel` or another library with round-tripping support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change if this is considered worth the (small) effort, `pyyaml` could be replaced with `ruamel` or another library with round-tripping support.
```

### Avoiding lock-in

If possible avoid frameworks that only work with data structures they themselves provide.

> If possible avoid frameworks that require custom serialization / de-serialization logic to be defined inside the data structures to be customized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If possible, avoid frameworks that only work with data structures they themselves provide.

If possible, avoid frameworks that require custom serialization / de-serialization logic to be defined inside the data structures to be customized.
```

We decide to start out using `cattrs` because it

- can work with the existing configuration data classes
- serialization and de-serialization can be customized without touching the classes we customize for

> - was already a transitive dependency at the time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decide to start out using `cattrs` for the following reasons:

- it can work with the existing configuration data classes
- serialization and de-serialization can be customized without touching the classes we customize for
- it was already a transitive dependency at the time
```

This decision is to be revisited if we find ourselves writing a lot of code to enable features we could get more easily by switching library / framework.

## Consequences

- we keep flexibility
- we reduce technical debt rather than increasing configuration system complexity
- we keep user experience "good enough for now"
- component development does not require additional framework knowledge

## Alternatives Considered

### Using `omegaconf`

An earlier iteration ([#936](https://github.com/C2SM/icon4py/pull/936)) used `omegaconf`.

- required little change in existing configuration classes
- avoided cleaning up the duplicated configuration options in component configuration classes by automatically synchronizing the component's values with the top-level (if given)

> - introduced additional indirection: a `ConfigManager` class was built from the configuration file, which then in turn built the configuration classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- introduced additional indirection: a `ConfigManager` class was built from the configuration file, which in turn built the configuration classes.
```

- introduced the need to wrap configuration classes in `ConfigHandler`s in some cases

> All in all it traded complexity for the feature that config classes can define options that refer to options in a config class higher up the hierarchy.

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit convoluted. Some rephrasing would be nice

Author: I simplified it.
